--- 
title: I &#9829; the Web
layout: post
---
The world wide web is a crazy, scary place. Even though I spend a lot of time there, it still surprises me occasionally. Today, as I was making my way through my feeds, I found an article about "testing, and how bad it is":http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/personalitytests. This article naturally had some context I didn't already know, especially about "intelligence":http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/001606, which was a fascinating discussion all by itself. Indeed, it included as a reference a "much more dense piece on the same subject":http://pharyngula.org/index/weblog/comments/sexist_calvinism/, with a focus on mathematics.

That article naturally made references to context unfamiliar to me (keep in mind I'm reading these articles as I reach the links, because finishing the first article without knowing its referents beforehand would be pointless), so I got to read "an example of how _not_ to discuss correlation between gender and intelligence":http://www.scsuscholars.com/2005_01_01_scsu-scholars_archive.html#110626421773325830, as well as a "fascinating biography":http://bookbuzz.com/MBIO_About_Erdos.htm of a brilliant mathematician. Which article lead to a "book":http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/0684846357/ that I now, naturally, want to read. But that's for later.

Up one level from Erd&ouml;s, there was still background on what Stephen Pinker thought about gender (as he is frequently cited by gender-innatists, if you're actually following the content of these links). That link was dead, though, so I googled around (encountering "my first ever Google server error":/files/google_error.png, woo) and found a "debate on gender-innate intelligence":http://www.edge.org/3rd_culture/debate05/debate05_index.html. That debate under my belt as context, I was able to finish the article so I could finish the article so I could finish the article that I sat down to read in the first place.

I love the web.
