--- 
title: Brain Dump
layout: post
---
"The newest PowerBooks":http://www.apple.com/powerbook/ and "iPods":http://www.apple.com/ipod/ are very, very cool. It makes me happy to use them.

I need a "tumblelog":http://project.ioni.st.

Inept people are, surprisingly enough, inept. _So_ inept, in fact, that "they can't tell they're inept":http://www.iwritecode.com/RWD/Thoughts/Inept.html. This frustrates me to no end, practically on a daily basis.

"ReBoot":http://uts.cc.utexas.edu/~ifex534/general.html is very geeky, fun, and it's entirely a shame that the first two seasons will never get released on DVD.

"Remember the Milk":http://www.rememberthemilk.com/ is entirely too useful for things like, oh, remembering the milk.

Newly found good music-to-program-to: "Imogen Heap":http://www.imogenheap.com/ and "Massive Attack":http://www.massiveattack.co.uk/.

"Ginormous limes":http://www.boingboing.net/2005/12/18/ginormous_lime_of_th.html are totally cool. I want one.

"Rails 1.0":http://rubyonrails.com is finally out. I'm already drooling over 1.1.

"Gaim 2.0 beta 1 is out":http://gaim.sourceforge.net/, but interestingly enough, "the changelog":http://gaim.sourceforge.net/ChangeLog seems to indicate that it is following "Adium's":http://adiumx.com lead, rather than the other way around.

The Patriot Act "didn't get renewed":http://www.cnn.com/2005/POLITICS/12/16/senate.patriot.ap/index.html. Yay.

The EU has implemented "two years of records for all phone and internet use":http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/4527840.stm. Scary.

Domains in the .be (that'd be Belgium. As in, "Award for Most Gratuitous Use of the Word Belgium in a Screenplay") are being "given away for free":http://www.e3internet.ru/check.php. I'm way too late. All the cool "domain hacks":http://xona.com/domainhacks/suggest/abe.htm I could think of are taken. It would have rocked to own pho.be. Just imagine... techo.pho.be, and every other phobia, there for the taking. Or scri.be. Ah, well.

The domain suffix .ko is "apparently being reserved for a unified Korea":http://www.vuw.ac.nz/~caplabtb/dprk/DPRK_ICT.html#february01. This gives me a personal stake in the reunification of the nation of Korea... how else am I going to get the domain ar.ko?

"Well executed movies":http://www.eternalsunshine.com/ are "hard to find":http://disney.go.com/disneypictures/narnia/. There seems to be something about _telling_ versus _showing_ that I suspect is very big and important and might warrant a blog post of its own one day.

Video game companies (and their detractors) can get scarily insane-sounding when they "sue people":http://www.1up.com/do/feature?pager.offset=0&cId=3146206.

"Really amazingly beautiful books":http://hillhousepublishers.com/index.html that I aspire to own one day are breathtakingly expensive.

The Wikipedia "apparently has an error rate extremely similar to that of the Encyclopedia Brittanica":http://www.nature.com/news/2005/051212/full/438900a.html. I'm not sure if that actually _says_ anything, but it's pretty cool anyway.

And that's all I've got.
