--- 
title: Continuing recovery
layout: post
---
Having made it home from the hospital, my condition (and my routine) seems to be stabilizing. I am able to sleep consistently (all night every night and napping each afternoon) so I'm hopeful that my bones will swiftly knit. The pain is improving each day, and I am able to hobble around the house a little with the help of a hemiwalker.

If you'd like to see pictures of the remains of my car, they can be found "over on the blog my dad set up while I was in the hospital":http://andreshealth.blogspot.com/2005/11/photos.html. If you'd like to (heh, this feels awkward), you can "donate money to help me get a new laptop":http://helpandre.com thanks to my roommate "Joel":http://www.joelmwatson.com/blog/ and my friend "Phil":http://philisha.net. Said laptop would be very helpful for purposes of working both as I recover and afterward--it's really hard to make a living as a programmer without a computer to program on.

My main concerns at this point boil down to a few issues:
* Catching up on missed schoolwork, and working with my professors to pass my classes this semester if I possibly can.
* Wait for my bones to finish knitting without going stir-crazy (finding work to do should help this).
* Replace the stuff destroyed in the crash, especially my laptop and car. The insurance company seems hell-bent on ripping me off to the greatest extent it can get away with, so prayer here would be especially appreciated right now.
* Start figuring out the process that will be required for the lawsuit/whatever to (hopefully) get some money to replace the things the insurance company won't cover.

I'd like to thank my parents for their help in getting me this far: my mom especially for keeping me company while I was in the hospital and doing everything she could to help me heal, and my dad for help in too many ways to list, but especially helping me while I was in the hospital.

I'd also like to thank every single person who helped while I was in the hospital, visited me, prayed, or otherwise showed concern for my condition over the last two weeks. It amazed me how many people cared.

*Update:* I just discovered today that my roommates covered my rent while I was unable to. I would like to thank my roommates profusely and from the bottom of my heart for their amazing help as I slowly recover my abilities to care for myself as my bones knit. Thanks, guys.
